Resolve MS comments (boosting) (#73)
mlsa-book/MLSA: book/P3C16_boosting.qmd

---

> abstract: This chapter introduces gradient boosting machines (GBMs) for regression and then describes the extensions to survival analysis. GBMs are a highly modular and flexible algorithm that can be applied to any machine learning model though are generally used with 'weak' models such as decision trees. Boosting fits a weak learner to data and then trains models iteratively on the residuals from the previous iteration. GBMs extend naturally to survival analysis by providing loss functions suitable for the survival setting, such as likelihoods associated with PH and AFT models, as well as differentiable adaptations to the C-index. Survival GBMs generally make ranking predictions but in some cases can be composed to survival distribution predictions, for example when using boosting to estimate proportional hazards and accelerated failure time models. This chapter primarily covers the work of Binder, Mayr, and Schmid. GBMs have been demonstrated to perform well on both low- and high-dimensional data in survival analysis and are therefore a popular class of machine learning model within this domain. However, GBMs can be computationally intensive and may require specialist software such as XGBoost to efficiently optimise performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
abstract: This chapter introduces gradient boosting machines (GBMs) for regression and then describes the extensions to survival analysis. GBMs are highly modular and flexible ensemble methods that can optimize any differentiable loss function by sequentially fitting 'weak' learners to the residuals of previous models. GBMs extend naturally to survival analysis by using loss functions suitable for the survival setting, such as likelihoods associated with PH and AFT models, as well as differentiable adaptations to the C-index. Survival GBMs often make ranking predictions but can also be composed to survival distribution predictions, for example when using boosting to estimate proportional hazards and accelerated failure time models. GBMs have been demonstrated to perform well on both low- and high-dimensional data in survival analysis and are therefore a popular class of machine learning model within this domain. However, GBMs can be computationally expensive and may require specialist software such as XGBoost to optimise performance.
```

# Boosting Methods {#sec-boost}

{{< include _wip_minor.qmd >}}

Similarly to random forests, boosting is an ensemble method that creates a model from a 'committee' of *weak* learners that make poor predictions individually, which creates a *slow learning* approach that requires many iterations for a model to be a good fit to the data.
However, the two differ in how committee members are selected and combined: in random forests, each decision tree is grown independently and predictions are averaged, whereas in boosting, weak learners are fit sequentially with errors from one learner used to train the next, and predictions are made by a weighted linear combination of all learners (@fig-boosting).

## GBMs for Regression {#sec-surv-ml-models-boost-regr}

Gradient Boosting Machines (GBMs) are the most widely used family of boosting algorithms.
The general idea is to choose a differentiable loss function and iteratively fit weak learners to the negative gradient of that loss — a generalization of fitting residuals that covers regression, classification, and survival settings alike.

> <!--TODO: \XX should be \xx as per convention -->

Author: (\XX, \yy) is correct here, it' the full dataset, \XX \in R^{n \times p} is the covariate matrix. \xx \in R^p is the vector for an individual

@fig-boosting illustrates this process in a least-squares regression setting, where the negative gradient reduces to the ordinary residual:

> <!--TODO: uses f here and in the graphic, but switches to g later on -->

Author: updated to use $w$ for 'Weak learner'

Reviewer: also in the graphic?

Reviewer: ah yes, i see , ok

**Number of iterations**, $M$:
The number of iterations is often claimed to be the most important hyper-parameter in GBMs and it has been demonstrated that as the number of iterations increases, so too does the model performance (with respect to a given loss on test data) up to a certain point of overfitting [@Buhlmann2006; @Hastie2001; @Schmid2008a].
This makes sense as the foundation of boosting rests on the idea that weak learners can slowly be combined to form a single powerful model.

> Finding the optimal value of $M$ is critical as a value too small will result in poor predictions, whilst a value too large will result in biased predictions.

Reviewer: GBMs are therefore best combined with early stopping.

Reviewer: in combination with a small learning rate and high max iterations
